Antibodies and chemicals.
Rabbit polyclonal antibodies against tau and mouse monoclonal antibodies against actin and HA tag were obtained from Abcam (ab-64193), MP biomedicals (clone C4, no. 691001) and Covance (HA.11, clone 16B12, cat. no. MMS-101P), respectively. A polyclonal antibody against the HTRA1 PDZ domain (residues 377–480) (ref. 26) was made in house and tested for specificity as well as cross-reactivity with other HtrA family members (data not shown). The rabbit polyclonal antibody against residues 158–480 of HTRA1 was a gift from A. Baldi20 (Second University of Naples, Caserta). The Aβ1–42 peptide was ordered from Designer BioScience, Cambridge, UK, and tau peptides used in ITC binding assays were ordered from Intavis, Cologne. For immunofluorescence microscopy, secondary AlexaFluor 633-coupled goat anti-mouse and goat anti-rabbit antibodies were purchased from Life Technologies as was the To-Pro 3 nuclear counterstain. The amine-reactive dye AlexaFluor 568 carboxylic acid succinimidyl ester and fluorescently labeled secondary antibodies for immunofluorescence were purchased from Life Technologies. Amine-reactive DyLight488 antibody labeling kits were purchased from Thermo Scientific, and glass-bottom slides for TIRFM were from Ibidi (Martinsried, Germany). ThS, the protein transfection reagent Pro-Ject and MDH from porcine heart were ordered from AAT Bioquest, Thermo Fisher Scientific and Roche, respectively. Aldolase was taken from a gel filtration HMW calibration kit (GE Healthcare).

Plasmids.
Bacterial expression plasmids based on the pET21d (Novagen) for purification of recombinant His6-tagged HTRA1, ΔPDZ, HTRA1S328A and HTRA1S328A ΔPDZ were published previously7, and the expression plasmid encoding the PDZ domain of HTRA1 with a C-terminal His6-tag (residues 380–480) was constructed by PCR and standard cloning techniques using the above plasmid as template. 4R WT and MTBD tau plasmids were constructed by cloning the coding sequence of full-length 2N4R human tau (441-residue isoform) and of residues 258–360 containing the ΔK280 mutation into pET3d expression vectors (Novagen) using NcoI and BamHI restriction enzymes. The MTBD fragment was chosen because of its high aggregation propensity, which was determined previously24. For transient overexpression of HA-tagged full-length 4R tau with the P301L mutation, the respective coding sequence was amplified and cloned into pcDNA3.1 for constitutive overexpression in mammalian cultured cells, using a forward primer introducing an N-terminal HA tag with a BamHI restriction site and a reverse primer with an XhoI restriction site.

Expression and purification of recombinant human HTRA1, full-length tau and MTBD of tau.
For the in vitro protease and disintegration assays and the treatment of cells with recombinant HTRA1, the indicated variants of human HTRA1 were purified as described previously26. After Ni-NTA affinity and hydroxyapatite chromatography with phosphate gradient elution, the protein was further purified by size exclusion chromatography using Superdex 200 preparation grade columns (GE Healthcare) in 10 mM HEPES, 50 mM (NH4)2SO4, pH 7.5. Protein concentrations were determined by Bradford assays and SDS-PAGE. HTRA1, HTRA1 ΔPDZ and the PDZ domain comprise residues 158–480, 158–375 and 377–480, respectively. 4R WT tau and MTBD tau were purified as described previously26.

Heparin induced fibrillization of recombinant human tau.
Aggregation of human full-length tau was performed as described previously26 with minor modifications. 20 μM tau was incubated in aggregation buffer (100 mM sodium acetate, 2 mM DTT, pH 7) at 55 °C, 800 r.p.m. for 10 min, followed by addition of 1 mM fresh DTT and 50 μM heparin. After fibrillization at 37 °C, 900 r.p.m. for 48 h up to 5 d, with addition of 1 mM of fresh DTT every 24–48 h, the extent of aggregation was checked by ultracentrifugation and measuring thioflavin T fluorescence. The resulting aggregates were used in disintegration experiments, as explained above. For the proteolysis experiments with HTRA1, the tau fibrils were sedimented by ultracentrifugation at 186,000g, 4 °C for 1 h and resuspended with HTRA1 proteolysis buffer to remove heparin and soluble tau species. Concentrations were determined by SDS-PAGE, Coomassie staining and comparison with BSA samples of known concentration. Fibrils composed of MTBD tau were assembled accordingly, except that the duration of fibrillization was reduced to 24 h.

Protein labeling.
For immunofluorescence microscopy, recombinant human HTRA1 was labeled with the amine reactive fluorescent dye AlexaFluor 568 carboxylic acid succinimidyl ester (Life Technologies) by incubating 200 μM of HTRA1 with 2 mM of the reactive dye in 100 mM sodium bicarbonate, pH 8.3, at room temperature (RT) and with constant agitation for 1 h. Prior to the labeling reaction, the HTRA1 solution was adjusted to the labeling buffer using desalting columns (PD SpinTrap G-25, GE Healthcare). After completing the labeling reaction, the labeled protein was separated from the free dye using desalting columns and stored at −80 °C in single-use aliquots. For TIRFM of fibrils, tau fibrillization was performed as described above for 48 h, the fibrils were dialyzed against the labeling buffer PBS, pH 7.4, and incubated with one-tenth of the recommended amount of DyLight 488 amine-reactive dye from an antibody labeling kit (Thermo Scientific). Labeling buffer and the ratio of dye to protein were chosen to yield a low degree of labeling in order to preserve the fibril structure and minimize the interference of the label with the proteolysis by HTRA1. The labeling reaction was performed for 1 h at RT without agitation in the dark. The labeled fibrils were dialyzed against PBS, pH 7.4 to remove unbound dye and stored on ice in the dark until usage.

Disintegration of tau fibrils by HTRA1 in vitro.
For disintegration assays by ultracentrifugation, 6.8 μM full-length or MTBD tau aggregates from 48 h or 24 h fibrillization reactions, respectively, were incubated with buffer or amounts of HTRA1S328A corresponding to the molar ratios indicated in Figures 1 and 6a,b or with control proteins in 100 mM piperazine-N,N′-bis(2-ethanesulfonic acid) (PIPES), 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, pH 7 at 37 °C, 450 r.p.m., for 16 h. The titration of HTRA1 was done in 100 mM 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (MES), 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, pH 6 for 1 h. Analysis of solubility was performed by ultracentrifugation of 20-μl samples at 186,000g, 4 °C for 1 h. As controls, HTRA1 or the proteins indicated in Figures 1 and 6a,b were incubated under the same conditions without tau but with the respective volume of aggregation buffer (100 mM sodium acetate, 2 mM DTT, pH 7). The supernatants were mixed with loading buffer containing DTT, and the pellets were solubilized with the respective amounts of loading buffer by thorough vortexing and resuspension. Total samples were removed before ultracentrifugation and treated accordingly. The amounts of tau in the individual fractions were assessed by SDS-PAGE followed by Coomassie staining. MTBD tau was detected by immunoblotting with a polyclonal antibody against the repeat region of tau, whereas HTRA1 and control proteins were analyzed by Coomassie staining. The relative amounts of soluble Tau were determined by calculating the ratio of band intensities of the supernatant versus total protein samples using the ImageJ gel analysis plugin. For the titration experiments using varying concentrations of HTRA1, HTRA1S328A was incubated with full-length tau fibrils at the ratios indicated in Supplementary Figure 1b for 1 h at 37 °C followed by ultracentrifugation and SDS-PAGE as described above. Band intensities determined using the gel analyzing tool implemented in ImageJ of Coomassie-stained gels of the supernatant samples were divided by the intensities of the total samples for the relative amount of solubilized tau shown in the graph. 4–8 independent experiments were used to calculate the mean and s.e.m. of solubilized tau for each ratio. For AFM analysis, the disintegration was done using 100 mM MES, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, pH 6, and the disintegration samples were diluted to 2 μM final tau concentration, calculated on the basis of the full-length monomer molecular weight of 45.8 kDa.

Preparation of Aβ1–42 aggregates and disintegration by HTRA1S328A.
For the aggregation of the Aβ1–42 peptide, the lyophilized powder was dissolved in DMSO to obtain a 10-mM Aβ1–42 stock solution which was stored as 20-μl aliquots at −20 °C. The aggregation was performed as described in the text, by dilution of the Aβ1–42 peptide into aggregation buffer (50 mM Tris, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.5) to a final concentration of 50 μM, followed by incubation without agitation at 37 °C for 14 h. The successful aggregation was assessed by means of ThT fluorescence and sedimentation by ultracentrifugation. Aβ1–42 disintegration was performed by incubation of 25 μM Aβ1-42 aggregates with equimolar amounts of HTRA1S328A or MDH in 100 mM MES, 100 mM NaCl, pH 6 at 37 °C, 450 r.p.m. for 16 h. After the incubation period, the insolubility was determined by ultracentrifugation, followed by SDS-PAGE of a sample from the disintegration reaction, the supernatant and the pellet using precast 4–12% Bis-Tris gels (Life Technologies). The protein bands were detected by silver staining.

In vitro proteolysis of soluble and fibrillar tau.
Proteolysis of tau fibrils and soluble tau by HTRA1 was done essentially as described in the article text. 680 nM tau were incubated with WT HTRA1 at a molar protease/substrate ratio of 1:2.5, i.e., with 272 nM WT HTRA1 in 50 mM Tris-HCl, 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), pH 8 at 37 °C, 350 r.p.m. Aliquots were taken at the time points indicated in Figures 3a,b and 6c, mixed with loading dye and 50 mM TCEP, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept frozen until analysis by SDS-PAGE. For disintegration followed by proteolysis, tau fibrils or soluble tau were incubated with a tenfold molar excess of HTRA1S328A, HTRA1S328AΔPDZ or the PDZ domain over WT HTRA1 (i.e., 2.72 μM) or buffer at 37 °C for 2 h before addition of WT HTRA1. Samples were boiled at 96 °C for 10 min and subjected to SDS-PAGE using precast 10% Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gels (Life Technologies). For proteolysis followed by AFM, the same protocol was used except that 2 μM fibrillar tau was used, and the other protein concentrations were adjusted accordingly to obtain the same molar ratios. Before AFM, the ultracentrifugation step was omitted to keep the fibrils intact for reliable analysis.

AFM and image analysis.
Without previous treatment, 5-μl samples were deposited on a freshly cleaved mica surface (Plano GmbH) and adsorbed for 3 min at RT. After addition of 15 μl 1× TAEMg (40 mM Tris, 20 mM acetic acid, 2 mM EDTA, 12.5 mM Mg acetate, pH 8), the sample was scanned on a MultiModeTM 8 microscope (Bruker, Germany) equipped with a Nanoscope V controller, using the ScanAsyst PeakForce TappingTM operational mode. Silicon nitride probes with 0.7 N/m nominal spring constant and sharpened pyramidal tips (ScanAsyst Fluid+, Bruker) were used for scanning. At least three images (3 × 3 μm) were acquired from random locations of the mica surface for statistical analysis of the results. Recorded views were third-order flattened and exported as TIFF files using the NanoScope 6.14 software (Bruker). Fibril lengths were analyzed with ImageJ51 by creating a collection of regions of interest (ROIs) corresponding to individual fibrils using the freehand selection tool and measuring the sets of ROIs of individual images. The sums of the lengths of fibrils in the images of each sample were statistically analyzed using the two-sided Student's t-test for unpaired samples with Welch's correction using the statistical analysis software Prism 5 (GraphPad). To detect possible changes in the abundance of fibrils depending on their individual lengths, the frequency distribution was analyzed with the same statistical software using the data sets obtained as described above. The bin width for the distribution was set to 50 nm, and the distribution of lengths ranging from 0–1,200 nm was displayed as absolute numbers or relative frequencies of fibrils populating each length interval.

Negative-stain electron microscopy of tau fibrils bound by HTRA1S328A.
Fibril decoration with HTRA1 and isolation. Before isolation via glycerol gradient ultracentrifugation and negative-stain EM, 12 μM tau fibrils were incubated in 300-μl 50 mM Tris, pH 8, with HTRA1 at a molar ratio HTRA1/tau of 1:1 or 3:1 or with buffer at 37 °C for 20 min. Glycerol gradients (10–40% (v/v)) were prepared using a gradient former (Gradient master 107, Biocomp). Subsequently, samples were added on the top of the gradients and were then centrifuged using a SW40-Ti rotor (Beckman Instruments) at 40,000g (i.e., 285,000g), 4 °C, for 16 h. Fractions were harvested and analyzed by EM.

Grid preparation and image recording. 4-μl sample droplets were applied to freshly glow-discharged grids (Agar scientific; G2400C) covered by a continuous thin carbon film. The sample was left for 45 s on the grid before blotting using filter paper (Whatman no. 4). The grid was then washed twice with ddH2O and negatively stained with 0.7% uranyl formate (Polysciences) for 45 s. After blotting the grid was air-dried and transferred to a JEOL JEM-1400 electron microscope equipped with a LaB6 and operated at 120 kV. Digital micrographs were recorded with a 4k × 4k CMOS Camera F416 (TVIPS) using minimal dose conditions.

TIRFM of labeled fibrils.
Preparation of microscopy slides and image acquisition. For the visualization of the time course of the proteolytic degradation of tau fibrils by HTRA1 using TIRF microscopy, heparin-induced tau fibrils were labeled with a DyLight 488 fluorescent dye as described above. Sterile eight-well glass bottom microscopy slides (Ibidi, Martinsried, Germany) were coated with the labeled fibrils by incubation of 0.01 μM tau fibrils diluted in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, at 37 °C protected from light for 1 h. After the coating reaction, the dishes were washed 3× with PBS, pH 7.4, before the addition of 1 μM WT HTRA1 in 50 mM Tris-HCl, 5 mM TCEP, pH 8, or buffer alone. For the generation of movies, 120 images were recorded over a time period of 4 h, for the quantification of the fluorescence decrease, higher-resolution images were recorded every 2 h for a total of 10 h. To visualize the decrease in fluorescence irrespective of bleaching, the coated dishes were incubated with HTRA1 or buffer for 14 h before recording single high-resolution endpoint images. All TIRFM experiments were performed on an Eclipse Ti-E (Nikon) inverted microscope operated by the AndorIQ image acquisition software and equipped with an Andor AOTF Laser Combiner (Andor Technology), a motorized TIRF Illuminator Unit (Nikon) and a Clara Interline CCD camera (Andor Technology). The images were acquired using the 488-nm laser line and an Apo TIRF 100×/1.49NA oil-immersion objective (Nikon).

Data processing. All image processing and quantification of the raw data acquired as described above was performed with ImageJ51. All time series of images were registered using the StackReg Plugin52 and normalized to the same range of minimum and maximum displayed values before further analysis and processing. The movies were exported as .avi files at a frame rate of 24 frames per second and JPEG compression. Regions of interest (ROIs) from the 10-h time series were displayed as a series of time points or used for the generation of fluorescence difference images. The latter were created by displaying the difference of the intensities of each pixel value between the t = 0 h and t = 10 h images as 8-bit images using the spectrum lookup table (LUT). For the analysis of local proteolysis depending on the relative position along the fibril length, 45 randomly chosen fibrils were analyzed with ImageJ. Single fibrils were marked with the freehand drawing tool, and their pixels were assigned to five portions of equal size corresponding to relative positions along the fibril. The fluorescence decrease in each portion relative to the total fluorescence decrease of the fibril was included in the data analysis. To quantify the changes in fluorescence of single fibrils as shown in Supplementary Figure 6b, ROIs containing fibrils were generated by setting an intensity threshold for the t = 0 h time point. This set of ROIs was applied to all time point images, and the average intensity of each ROI corresponding to a single fibril (or group of fibrils when overlapping) was normalized to the respective starting intensities at t = 0 h. Each value shown corresponds to the mean value of 300–400 individual ROIs per sample. The single endpoint images were adjusted to equal intensity ranges and displayed as grayscale images or as images using the spectrum LUT for a more demonstrative visualization of fluorescence intensities.

Mass spectrometry and analysis of cleavage sites.
Sample preparation for LC/MS. For the MS analysis of cleavage sites by HTRA1, proteolysis of soluble tau and tau fibrils was performed for the indicated duration after 2 h preincubation with HTRA1S328A or proteolysis buffer. Buffers and concentrations were the same as described above. 20-μl samples were acetone precipitated for 2 h at −80 °C. The supernatant containing the peptidic cleavage products was dried, resuspended with PBS and desalted as described53.

LC/MS/MS. Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo)54 that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 LC system (Thermo). The LC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 μm × 25 cm) with integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 3 μm resin (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 45 °C during data acquisition. Otherwise the temperature was kept at 30 °C. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in UPLC grade water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile, ACN). Peptides were delivered directly to the analytical column via the integrated autosampler at a flow rate of 0.7–0.9 μl/min in 100% solvent A. Peptides were subsequently eluted from the column by running a 25-min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 2% B; gradient 2% to 35% B for 10 min; gradient 35% to 45% B for 6 min; gradient 45% to 100% B for 2 min; 100% B for 7 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.

The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1.48) and set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS) in the scan range of m/z 300–1,800 and at a resolution of 30,000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane)55. Product ion spectra were recorded in a data-dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS) in a variable scan range and at a rapid normal scan rate. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 1.6–2.0 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (1.0 × 106 ions) followed by seven product ion scans (1.0 × 104 ions) in which peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for MS/MS generation permitting peptide sequencing and identification. CID collision energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS/MS spectra. During MS/MS data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 60 s with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of 1. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the FTMS, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states bigger than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

Peptide and protein identification. The recorded RAW files were processed in ProteomDiscoverer 1.3 (PD13, Thermo). MS/MS spectra were extracted using the Spectrum Selector node. Precursor selection was set to 'use MS1 precursor'. The mass range was set between 350–5,000 Da with a minimum peak count of 1. Mass analyzer was set to 'any' and MS order to 'MS2'. Activation type was set to 'is CID' and Scan type was defined as 'full' with ionization source set to 'is nanospray'. Selected spectra were submitted to the in house MASCOT server (version 2.4.1 (ref. 56)) using the PD13 MASCOT node. MS/MS spectra data were searched against an Escherichia coli K12 reference protein database downloaded from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/complete-proteomes; 4,312 protein sequences, download date 25.10.2013) and concatenated with the contaminants database (as implemented in MASCOT, 263 sequences) and the sequences of interest for Tau and HtrA1. The contaminants database contains known MS and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Mascot searches allowed for oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da) but no static modifications (cysteine residues were not alkylated with iodoacetamide). In accordance with our aim to detect endogenous cleavage sites, no enzyme was specified. The instrument type was set to ESI-TRAP and the mass tolerance was set to ± 5 p.p.m. for precursor mass and ± 0.5 Da for product ion masses. MS/MS spectra matches were then evaluated using the peptide validation node of PD13 with the standard settings (search against decoy database, target false discovery rate (FDR, strict): 0.01 and target FDR (released): 0.05). The reported results were further filtered. On the peptide level, only peptides with a minimum confidence 'medium' were reported, and on the protein level, only proteins with a minimum of at least two peptide hits were reported.

Data processing and P-site mapping. For data processing peptide lists were directly downloaded from MASCOT as CSV files. Prior to the download peptides were filtered based on their peptide score. Only peptides with a stringent score >29 were accepted (identity threshold). The downloaded files were then further processed with several in-house developed PERL scripts. First, the CSV files were converted to plain text files using the script MASCOT_Datacon_v05.pl. The obtained text files were then batch processed with the script SVG_builder_FAK_0555_script_v11.pl. This script goes through all of the indicated peptide lists and records occurrences of peptides in each individual experiment. It also calculates the start and end position of each peptide in an identified protein match and records the number of peptide spectrum matches (PSMs), irrespective of any modifications (count is based only on amino acid sequence). The recorded peptides were mapped to the primary sequence of full-length 4R tau, and the P1 sites were derived from their N- and C-terminal residues. Assignment of the cleavage site to equal-sized sections of the tau primary sequence was done with Excel (Microsoft).

Isothermal titration calorimetry.
To detect the direct interaction between HTRA1, HTRA1 ΔPDZ or the isolated PDZ domain of HTRA1 with tau-derived peptides, the indicated proteins were dialyzed against 50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 8, or 100 mM NaH2PO4, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.2. The peptides were dissolved in the same buffer but with 2% DMSO to a final concentration of 2 mM. The measurements were performed with a MicroCal ITC200 (Malvern Instruments) with 2 mM peptide in the syringe and 20 μM or 40 μM protein in the sample cell. For each measurement, 20 injections of 2 μl were done, except for the first 0.8-μl injection, at 37 °C with a stirring speed of 750 r.p.m. To exclude dilution effects, control measurements using peptide injections into buffer or buffer injections into the sample cells containing HTRA1 were performed. The raw data was evaluated using the MicroCal Origin software and applying the one set of sites fitting mode according to the instructions of the manufacturer.

Internalization of recombinant HTRA1 by HEK 293T cells.
Given that HTRA1 is secreted into the cell culture medium but is also located to the cytosol, we reasoned that this subfraction of HTRA1 could be reinternalized after secretion. To study the spontaneous internalization of recombinant HTRA1 protein from the medium, 8 × 105 HEK 293T cells were seeded in poly-D-lysine–coated 6-cm cell culture dishes and grown for 24 h to reach 50–60% confluency. Cells were washed twice with PBS before addition of 4-ml serum-free medium containing recombinant, labeled HTRA1 in the concentration and for the incubation time indicated in Figures 2 and 6e and in Supplementary Figure 3. Subsequently, cells were detached from the culture dish by trypsin-EDTA treatment, centrifuged and the cell pellet was washed thoroughly with PBS to remove all residual trypsin from the sample. The resulting pellet was lysed with RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitor (Roche). 150 μg total cell lysate were analyzed by SDS PAGE followed by immunoblotting. Alternatively, 1.5 × 105 cells were seeded in each well of a 24 well plate on poly-D-lysine–coated glass coverslips, treated with 500 μl serum-free DMEM medium per well containing 50 μg/ml AlexaFluor 568–labeled HTRA1S328A, grown for 24 h, washed, methanol fixed and stained for immunofluorescence as described above. As a control for the uptake of labeled HTRA1, the amine reactive dye by itself was saturated by 1:5 dilution with 100 mM Tris, pH 8.42, and the same concentration as assessed by absorption at λ = 578 nm of the labeled protein and isolated dye was used.

Seeding of tau aggregation in HEK 293T cells.
The seeding of intracellular tau aggregation in HEK 293T cells was done as described30 with some modifications and with additional analysis of the effect of HTRA1 internalized from the extracellular space. HEK 293T cells were used as they are suitable for particularly high expression, which is needed for efficient seeding of cytoplasmic tau aggregation. Cell lines were routinely tested for mycoplasma contamination on a regular basis in the lab.

Preparation of MTBD aggregate seeds. Fibril seeds composed of MTBD tau were prepared by fibrillization for 24 h as described above, followed by ultracentrifugation at 186,000g, 4 °C for 1 h. The pellets were thoroughly resuspended with PBS, pH 7.4, and vortexed, and the extent of fibrillization was checked by SDS-PAGE of samples from the supernatant and pellet. Typically, all of the MTBD tau was found in the pellet after 24 h of fibrillization. MTBD tau aggregates were sonicated in a water bath for 2 × 2 min before performing protein transfection.

Transient transfection of HEK 293T cells and seeding of aggregation. For sarkosyl extraction experiments, HEK 293T cells were transiently transfected by nucleofection (Lonza, Switzerland) with a pcDNA3.1 plasmid for overexpression of HA-tagged full-length human tau with point mutation P301L. 4 ×105 cells were grown in each well of a six-well plate for expression of P301L tau for 24 h to reach about 50% confluency. Cell culture dishes were coated with poly-L-lysine before seeding. Freshly prepared MTBD tau aggregate seeds were transfected into the cells at a final concentration of 17.5 μg/ml using 10 μl of the cationic lipid-based protein transfection reagent Pro-Ject per well, followed by 4 h incubation with DMEM culture medium without serum and 20 h of incubation with 0.5% FBS. For HTRA1 internalization experiments, cells were washed twice with serum-free DMEM medium, followed by addition of 2 ml of medium conditioned with either PBS or HTRA1 at a final concentration of 150 μg/ml, i.e., 4.1 μM, and incubated at 37 °C for 20 h before performing sarkosyl extraction and immunoblotting.

Sarkosyl extraction from cultured cells. After seeded aggregation, sarkosyl extraction was performed to assess the abundance of aggregated versus soluble, HA-tagged P301L tau. Sarkosyl extraction was done essentially as described before30 with some modifications. Cells were detached from the culture dish by trypsinization and washed thoroughly with PBS to remove all residual trypsin from the cell pellet. The pellet was resuspended with lysis buffer containing sarkosyl, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EGTA, 5 mM EDTA, 1% sarkosyl, pH 7.4 with protease inhibitor (Roche complete protease inhibitor tablet) and incubated on ice for 15 min. For cell lysis, the suspension was syringe sheared 10 times with a 27G needle, followed by incubation on ice for 15 min, 2 × 2 min sonication in the water bath and incubation at 25 °C for 20 min. The samples were ultracentrifuged at 186,000g, 4 °C for 60 min, the supernatant was saved as a sarkosyl-soluble fraction, and the pellet was resuspended with the corresponding amount of SDS loading buffer containing 1% SDS by vigorous vortexing. Equal amounts of the individual samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting based on the sarkosyl supernatant concentrations determined by absorption at 280 nm using a NanoDrop micro volume spectrophotometer (Peqlab, Germany). Volumes of the sarkosyl insoluble fractions were adjusted accordingly. The samples were loaded onto 10% SDS gels followed by immunoblotting against tau, the HA tag, HTRA1 or actin. The bands were detected by alkaline phosphatase (AP)-coupled secondary antibodies, followed by chromogenic detection of AP activity. For quantification, blots from 3 or 4 independent experiments were used to calculate the signal intensities of sarkosyl pellet bands from HTRA1-treated samples relative to the PBS-treated samples, using the gel analysis tool implemented in ImageJ.

Immunofluorescence and confocal laser-scanning microscopy.
For seeding of tau aggregation and for HTRA1 internalization experiments to be analyzed by confocal laser-scanning microscopy, cells were transfected as done before for sarkosyl extraction, with some modifications. Following transfection with tau P301L expression plasmids, 1.6 × 105 cells were transferred to each well of 24 well plates with poly-D-lysine–coated glass coverslips and grown for 24 h before transfection with MTBD seeds, which were prepared as described above. For transfection in 24-well plates, 2.5 μl of the transfection reagent were used per well. Treatment with labeled HTRA1 was done as described above except that 1.35 μM labeled HTRA1 was used in a final volume of 500 μl. After an incubation period of 20 h, as described above, cells were fixed with ice-cold methanol, permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 for 5 min and washed with PBS before further staining was performed. For the detection of amyloid aggregates, ThS staining was performed as described in the text: cells were incubated with 0.005% ThS, dissolved in PBS and sterile filtered, for 8 min at RT, and then washed 5× with 50% ethanol for 5 min. The samples were then blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 30 min before antibody staining with primary antibodies as indicated in Figure 2a,b and Supplementary Fig. 3c,d, using AlexaFluor 633–labeled secondary antibodies. The anti-HA antibody and secondary antibodies were diluted 1:500, and the polyclonal anti-HTRA1 PDZ antibody was diluted 1:50 in 3% BSA/PBS. Before mounting the samples with ProLong Gold antifade mounting solution (Life Technologies), they were washed with PBS 3× for 15 min at RT. DAPI was added at a dilution of 1:10,000 together with the secondary antibody solutions. The nuclear counterstain To-Pro 3 iodide (Life Technologies) was used at a dilution of 1:500 from a 1-mM stock solution. When To-Pro 3 staining was done, the samples were treated with 100 μg/ml RNAse A at 37 °C for 20 min to eliminate unspecific staining of cytoplasmic RNA. Microscopy was done with a Leica TCS SP5 Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope equipped with Leica HyD Gallium Arsenide phosphide hybrid detection systems. Image acquisition was performed with the same detector sensitivity settings for samples and controls. Images of the different channels were acquired individually in serial acquisition mode to avoid fluorescent bleedthrough. Images of single focal planes using a 60 μm pinhole width are shown.